# Class\<T\>

I have cloned the Maven repository, set it to branch 4.0.x (the default is 3.9.10), ran `mvn clean install`, then `mvn generate-sources` so I could debug it in Intellij to see how it works. I quickly stumbled upon an interface named Lookup, implemented in the ProtoLookup class that sits in package org.apache.maven.cling.invoker in the maven-cli module in the impl module. So far for nested modules and large codebases.

The ProtoLookup class has one member field that puzzled me:

```
private final Map<Class<?>, Object> components;
```

The puzzling thing is the `Class<?>` type that is used as key for this map. I never used `Class<?>` as type, it is new for me.

## Reflection and creating Class\<T\> object

As I never worked with `Class<T>` and as it is no part of SE 11 I had no understanding of its use. So I asked ChatGPT who told me that:

- This class is part of the Java Reflection API
- This API is used to inspect and manipulate classes, fields and methods at runtime
- An instance of `Class<T>` is return type of:
    - MyClass.class
    - someObject.getClass()
    - Class.forName("fully.qualified.ClassName")

## General use

You can do the following things with it:

- dynamically create objects
- check types at runtime
- look up methods, fields and annotations
- register or reference types without instantiating them

### Dynamically creating objects

There are two ways to create objects from a `Class<T>` object:

- ```clazz.newInstance()```
- ```clazz.getDeclaredConstructor().newInstance()```

## Use in Maven

Maven uses class objects as keys in a registry map that is a member field of the ProtoLookup class. As keys must be unique, such a registry map must have unique object types in it and that is indeed the case here. Like many Maven types ProtoLookup has a public static Builder class inside that is used to create a ProtoLookup object and to add objects to the map, and this is the declaration/initialization of the map within that Builder class:

```
private final Map<Class<?>, Object> components = new HashMap<>();
```

The reason why this is a fine way of storing unique objects of different complex types, is that when you would use some other key type, you would have a bigger chance of doing the wrong casting when retrieving the element. Using Class<?> as key means you know by definition what the type of the object is. You can just ask for the "SettingsXmlConfigurationProcessor" key/type or the "CliRequest" key/type. It is all more type safe.





